We're on the air, tape is on the air. Okay Leigh, I'll ask you first of all, just
give us a little bit about your background and why, what in your background
might have led you to write science fiction. Okay. Well, I've been writing since
I was about eleven or twelve, you know, writing all sorts of things. Mostly
adolescent sort of things when I was a kid. but when I when I was in high school
I started reading science fiction. It's just sort of natural to go from reading
it to writing it. Most people can't help themselves. If they have any
inclination toward writing, you know, and they read science fiction they'll
usually try and write it.
Were you interested... What interested you about science fiction? Was it the
hardware, or just the sense of wonder, quote unquote, that sort of thing?
Well, I know it's hard to say. I was older than most people. Most people start
reading it when they're 7 or 12 or something like that. So, I suppose I should
have had a good reason being 17 instead of 7. and that what happened but I don't
- it was just- it just appealed to me. You know, I always liked fairy tales and
fantasy kind of things and of course I read those things—the books you don't
think of as science fiction before I actually started reading science fiction
like 1984 and I enjoyed those. it just you know i have pretty eclectic taste and
it was one of the things i like to read so okay if i remember right from your
background you have a degree in history was that uh does history an interest in
history and maybe an interest in fantasy go hand in hand and has that helped you
in your writing that kind of oh yeah yeah i think it does I think in
fantasy and looking at what has happened you can sort of extrapolate to what
might happen. I think it's good to be able to look both ways when you're
interested in science fiction.
Your story so far indicates that you're more interested in science fiction than
fantasy. is that a marketing choice or is that where you're particularly yeah
that's my interest I can't seem to write for markets if I if I could I would be
writing a lot more and selling you know
yeah yeah but I pretty much write what I'm interested in I don't think about I'd
like to think that what I'm writing will sell, but I don't aim it toward a
particular magazine or market. Are you a full-time writer? No. You support your
eating habit in some other way. Yeah, I work at the Austin Community College as
a typist. Okay. So you can't have it launched out? No. Okay. All right. Well, I
read your stories, and I am not an English professor. The other guy who's not
here is an English professor. I'm a chemist, so I see things a little different.
But I like to look at the literary aspects. And one unifying theme that I saw in
your stories seemed to be communication and mainly misunderstandings between
people and misunderstandings between people and people and people and aliens.
and they get themselves in situations where all they had to do was just
understand each other a little bit. Is that something conscious that you are
trying to show, or is that a theme? No. That's the first time I've ever thought
about a common theme in my writing. But I suppose
that's true. It's probably everybody has sort of an obsession, and I think
I'm not an obsession, but it's an important thing for me, you know. I'm a fairly
social person and I like to communicate, and that's why I write. And so
communication is important.
Okay. The first four stories that you wrote, well, okay, not to scratch that,
Another thing that's common to me, and I read them all—you wrote them over a
number of years. I read them all in an afternoon, kind of savoring them. And
another thing that seems to be universally in your stories is power struggles.
You've got a power struggle between two sets of people or individuals or people
in institutions, that sort of thing. Is that something that you consciously do,
or is that— You have many? Yeah, well, that could be partly from personal
experience. Like in my adolescence, I had to deal with some institutions, and I
wasn't raised in an orphanage or anything, but you know, there were institutions
that affected my personal life, and I didn't like it. And also, I grew up in the
60s, and I think we tend to pick up things like that in these certain years, and
it's hard to shake those values. And I think one of the things is individuals
trying to work against things that they don't think are right in institutions
and big, you know, people having to struggle against big powers that they feel
they have no control over, but they want to try and they have to do something.
Another thing in your writing style, you concentrate quite a bit on sensory
descriptions, how something feels or tastes or textures. It's almost like Jack
Vance. It's not that he's more visual, but there's the sensory thing in there
that I like and enjoy, and that's another trademark that I kind of picked out
from reading your stories in one sitting. Is that something that you've ever
thought about before? No, I don't think so. That's very nice, though. Do you
notice things like textures? You seem to put them in. Yeah, I think so.
Yeah, I guess it's
hard to compare things like that to other people. You know, I don't know what
other people, if they notice how, you know, fabrics feel and how things smell.
But, you know, I think it's important. It adds immediacy to a story. I know I
read a lot of fiction where people don't put in sensory details, and you feel
like you're sort of floating through somebody's dream. And I know if you smell
and taste and touch the world they've created, it makes it a lot more immediate.
And I kind of like that feeling of actually being there. You know, I know
there's a lot of people who like dream-like stream-of-consciousness fiction, but
I like immediate, you know...
Okay, the first forest stories, Helen seemed to break the trend but involved
scientists and their work and they were doing research that I can think of the
oceanographers talking with the whales and the linguistics person and they do
some research and some are doing administration, and you seem to know a lot
about research. I do research, and you seem to have captured some of that, the
spirit of that, both the spirit of research and the bummer of having to deal
with administrators and that sort of thing. Have you worked around research
areas? Because that's such a big element in your work. Yeah, well, I worked in
hospitals for 10 years, and I think that gives you an idea of how people, you
know, have to deal with research and trying to apply things and administrative
hang-ups and stuff like that. You know, sit and listen to the doctor saying, oh,
we came up with this wonderful thing, but they're not going to let us use it, of
course, you know. But I've never really worked in research, you know. I don't
know.
I guess the hospital is probably the main background. Okay. Sure. But I noticed
that the thing, the trend, the idea that I set things in like
research labs and have scientists doing things. I looked back on my stories,
like, just a few months ago and I realized that almost every story is like that.
And it kind of horrified me that I'd done so many of the same things and I
decided, I'm going to not do that as much. I just finished a story that, you
know, same thing. it's like an education, well, a research institute. And I like
to think that I was doing something different every time I was writing, and I
looked back and I said, wow, look, everything's set in the lab or done by
scientists. But yeah, well, it's hard not to do that when you're trying to
extrapolate from science and stuff.
well as somebody who does that and also likes science that I don't like hard
science fiction as a rule but very few people actually in science fiction
capture where it's like to do research most of the time it's the the old the
genius scientists that probably has a cute daughter or something but no lab in
his basement not everybody you know not all of us are geniuses and there's just
a lot of hard work and keeping your nose to the grindstone and screwing around
with politics and the administrators and all that and that's what you seem to
have captured and is what interested me because benford writes about what is
what scientists are really like what you what happens when you really do
research but by and large science fiction although it's science they don't
really treat scientists as as people yeah they're just people they're the
romantic knights of science yeah or the darth vader's of science yeah yeah The
opposite. Okay, I wanted to ask you, okay, the second story that you wrote,
Whale Song,. Was this, do you have a theme for whales? I mean, I do. That's what
interested me about it. But, because they're so big and intelligent and you're
going to get blown away. Well, yeah. I like whales. I don't have a thing against
them. and I like their little cousins, the dolphins even, you know. But actually
this story came to me when I was reading about the Eskimos and I really intended
to write the story about the Eskimos more than the whales but the whale of
course became
the most important thing in the story, because it's a symbol of all sorts of
things. But somehow the story didn't come out weighted as much toward being a
story about Eskimos as whales. I can see that it would be the Eskimos though,
yeah. And the miscommunication, the generation gap and all that. I also would
like to ask you to pronounce that fourth story speaking to the tenth. How do you
say the title? When I talk about it, I just say speaking to other's, because I
can't remember the numbers. I have to look it up every time I write it down.
It's terrible. Well, I don't think I'll ever write a title like that again.
Well, it's a very catchy title. So you just say speaking to others, speaking to
others. Yeah. Don't put to the 20th. No, no. All right. So when we refer to
that, if we can. You can just say speaking to others. Okay. One thing I noticed,
too, in detail silence, that's actually kind of a space opera, that sort of
thing. It's a love story. You've got the Cassiopeians,
yeah, and you also had them in story number four, in speaking to others,
speaking to others. Are you building some kind of known space? No. Or
consistent? No, not really. For the off-planet stories I've written I used a
book called habitable habitable planets for man as a reference and I used all
the g-type stars within 20 light years and sort of it turns out it's the same
stars all the time because those are the ones that that are near us so okay
Helen was a different kind of story from the rest was the first one the first
published one that wasn't in a research lab or anything and it's it's a planet
kind of like Colorado was this kind of a homesick owed to the old state well
actually I wrote it well I'm still living in Colorado and it took a while to
sell it, but I don't know it just, I
just can't imagine that if people lived on L-5s in a way that sort of goes back
to salamander too, you know, that I can't imagine people living in tin cans and
being happy, and I can't imagine that when those, if the, I mean, I can see if
we do colonize space, like with L5s and such, that some of the older ones will
be obsolete eventually, you know, the technology will boom.
And so I thought, well, what would they do with the old ones? Why not make them
tourist places? And since I grew up in Colorado and I know that there are
tourists all over the mountains, I thought, well, preserve a piece of that up
there for people to go to. The idiosyncratic, is that the right thing that I
found back to the story was the Pakistanis. Yeah. All things Pakistan and they
were quite interesting. Was that a real direct opposite of the kind of wasp
inhabitants? Yeah. Just a counterpoint, their differences. Yeah, I like to stick
unlikely things in together. It's fun. It's not that unlikely, though. It's just
something you wouldn't expect. is helen whose face launched 28 conestoga
hovercraft your title mhm yeah do your title stick by and large on the short
stories so far um i have a hard time with titles sometimes i come up with pretty
good titles but then they're um titles i don't especially care for well whale
song um has been a title of about three different stories you know it's sort of
a natural like swan song kind of title and so I kind of regret that I didn't
come up with something that nobody else would have thought of and I think. Like
detailed silence the sort of a dull title now. Now that I look back on it and I
kind of but yeah
that's not one of my I have a hard time thinking up titles a lot of at times but
Helen I thought the title first and then the story so
far you've written short stories and I noticed there's at least one that's
coming out fairly soon what about a novel are you contemplating a novel are you
a novelist do you have where you're gonna have to write a novel so you can write
full-time? Well, yeah, there's no livelihood in writing short stories. I don't
have any novels planned. I wrote two novels when I first started writing science
fiction, but they're in my closet and I'm glad I didn't sell them. It'd be
embarrassing.
A story I just finished not too long ago, Her Furry Face, I had been planning a
novel and I had this 20 page outline, well maybe 15 page outline and I had all
these plots and subplots and one day I'd looked at it and I said, oh, all that's
boring except for this one little bit. And I said, I'll just write a short
story. So I did. And it's sold. No, not yet. OK.
Since you do have a real world job in writing, what do your, I'm curious what
the people whom you type for and work with you, what do they think about your
writing? Oh, they think it's wonderful, they're proud of me.
When I used to work in the hospital, and when I first sold a story, I'd tell
people I sold science fiction and they'd go, Oh, like, she always thought you
were a wonderful person until then. And it was like telling people you wrote
true confessions or, you know, something like that. And I noticed after Star
Wars, it seemed to make a big difference. People, you know, say, well, I also
write science fiction. I've sold some stories, and they go, oh, really? Wow,
that's wonderful, you know. And they're all, the people I work with have always
been really proud of me. You know, if somebody mentions science fiction, they
say, Oh, our secretary is a science fiction writer. I'm really proud of that.
It's funny. OK, one last question. How do you, if you had your druthers, how
would you like for it to work out? Would you like to get better and better at
short stories and just be able to sit and write? Or do you kind of like your
life, kind of content with the writing and the real job and that sort of thing?
Oh, I would love to write full time, you know. and then hopefully someday I
don't have anything against writing novels at all I know there's some people
that say novels short stories are the form but
I want to be able to write and make a living at it and I wouldn't write novels
just to make a living you know I won't write a novel just to make money you know
if I have an idea and I think it'd be a good novel I'll write it until then I
guess I'll just have to type at the college I guess that one thing facing short
story writers is the number of markets there aren't there are not a whole lot of
markets for short stories. No. I think there's going to is the economy going to
have to change? That's what you can ask about anything. Well, during the
depression in the 30's there were more magazines and more books being published
because it was cheap entertainment, you know, but it looks like with television
and stuff like that it's gonna be a little different this time if there is a,
you know, big depression in the economy. I don't know if people necessarily turn
to the printed word for, you know, entertainment. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know.
It's a sad thing because there isn't really any place for beginning writers to
sell their borderline,
I mean, you know, they're almost publishable stuff, Whereas it used to be people
could get a start. I mean, not that I want junk to be printed, but it's just
hard to compete. And people should have the opportunity… Everybody's got to sell
a story that they're not proud of to begin with. Very few people start out with
great stories and I think writers need all the encouragement they can get, being
published is the biggest. That's sad that there aren't places for new writers.
Okay. Thank you very much. You're welcome.